I think you all know this is not something I'm making. Again, as I said many times in the past,
this is what I said something. It's not something that you don't know and you've heard only the
first times. This is because I'm talking this to remind each of us to kind of strengthen our
practices.
So I always sound a member of what is teaching said, support each other. So we all sound our
members.
We are following the path of enlightenment according to our best capabilities. It is
responsibilities. It is, in a way, that obligation to each other to support the help, to according
to that clarification, and that is what it is. So therefore, again, the other day I mentioned about
the rafuddhi, you see, and rafuddhi when you talk, but the essence of rafuddhi is the devotions,
and the devotion can be divided in three or four. Those I mentioned in that. And today I'd like to
talk really about bodhicata. Bodhicata generally is hard for the zokki practices. Zokki bodhicata
can be divided into one, known as two bodhicata. Relative truth bodhicata, absolute truth bodhicata
.
So there's two bodhicata. And relative truth bodhicata and absolute truth, both are zokki,
particularly absolute truth bodhicata is zokki practice. It is zokki. Therefore, many times,
as N.K.T. Pardekarambhir said and I heard from his on the new retreat many times, named zokki
teachings as bodhicata teachings, bodhicata teachings. So that's all named. So I'd like
to talk with a little bit of highlight of this bodhicata, particularly as a relative level bodhic
ata.
Absolute truth bodhicata we're doing. This zokki practice is absolute
truth bodhicata. We're talking. So what I'd like to highlight as he said, relative truth
bodhicata. Now when we talk the relative true bodhicata, generally what do you think? When you
follow the spiritual path. Path, there is according to the great master Aditya. Aditya is one of
the
great masters that who visited India. He was also descended from great master Shandharakheta.
Shandharakheta was early born in the same family and later then as another his great, great, great
children. He is one of the great master known as Aditya. Aditya and Aditya himself were in teaching
life story. When the great bodhisattva was bodhisattva, Shandharakheta was born, that same
client that this great master Aditya was born. Aditya became one of the great masters in India.
To be there, there has been so many, so fortunate to have so many great master who visited since
Gaurabhema Sambhava, great master Shandharakheta came to Tibet. After that many great masters
visited one after another. And among that, then Aditya become one of the great masters who really
made big beneficial, big impact, impact in the Tibetan Buddhism to highlight of the essential
point of the teachings. That's what this great master Aditya did. So Aditya, one of the great
Aditya has highlighted teaching, it's not just Aditya's teaching, it is Buddha's teaching. When
you follow the spiritual path there is three individuals, divided as three individuals.
And the first, second, and third individuals. Those are named as also small individuals,
and medium individuals, and bigger individuals. And what they practice? What spiritual practice?
Generally, when you become spiritual, what that means? You become quite devoted. You become
devoted. When you have some degree of devotion, that individually is named, I think, world as
spiritual, spiritual. So this is what spiritual is. And now according to the Buddha's teaching,
there is three types of the practices. Those are known as devotion, renunciation, and bodhicata.
Those are three. All are connected, these three. First we need as listed names, first the most
important is devotion. As I said the other day, and you good, Buddha said devotion is the role
of the enlightenment, the role of the visitors. And we don't have the devotion, our role is closed.
And the devotion I divided into four, I mean not just I, I follow the teachings of the Buddha
and the great masters, they go to three or four different devotions. The first devotion is
interest. And we don't have that interesting, that attitude. There's no spiritual growth welcome,
or come and turn and open our door. And the ventilation of the skylight, there's no light
welcome. So devotion is the first important. Once we have devotions, second the most important is,
in the Buddhism, the renunciation. Renunciation thought is very important. Renunciation can be
translated as a training of the mind, or that uproot the samsara, that will happen. Or it will make
our heart circle like that. Once we have the renunciation, that means once we have the devotion,
once we have the renunciation like a head cube, and then what we need? We need bodhicata, bodhicata
.
With all the bodhicata, again we can go far. Therefore bodhicata is important. According to
these three practices, there are three types of individualism. If you can summarize, according to
the Great Master's article, or as the Buddha teaches, then there are three types, three
individuals. Four, small individuals, and medium individuals, and big individuals. Those are the
three individuals. The first, small individual is what? They have the devotions, but that attitude,
how the courage and the commitment, how weakens are, is divided into, because of their vision,
their goals, not just the individual, their physical or their situations, but their inner
situation, according to their courage and commitment, and divided into small, medium, and big.
Small
individuals, those bracket who have devotions, but they are thinking, "Oh, I read the books,
I heard this teaching, I like to be happy. Happy, and I like to have the happy content of my lives,
and also I like to have the devotions. They think I have to have nice rebirth in the future."
Kind of thinking of that small thought, that's kind of like, almost a little more connected with
their individual, their one's own individualist and thought practices. Practicing dharma, or
practicing meditating, that is known as small individuals. So that's the only kind of thinking,
not just only, merely, I said, merely or principally thinking themselves, and practicing doing good
things, which is wonderful, which is good. That means bring more harmony, peace, good
spiritual of the Buddha teaching is more harmony, more peace, more joy, more appreciation, bring
good things in the life and the lives of others. So that is good, very good. And the second is,
then, the medium individuals. Medium individuals, what? Medium individuals, they have now devotions
,
not just the devotions, but they have these four renoxation thoughts. Four renoxations,
renoxation attitudes. Renoxation attitude, I won't go today, but I will list the names,
and you all know. These four renoxation thoughts, first it is the precious lives.
Our life is not just cause, co-accidental, beautiful life that we have. And the second is
empowerment. Everything is empowerment. And the fourth is cause and effort. So third is cause and
effort are inseparable, or in, what's it called? Infinitive. Infinitive, they cannot mix that.
Cause and the result goes, goes side by side. As cause and condition, the result comes exactly that
.
As the result, definitely depends with the cause and condition. There are no excuses. No, there is
kind of like emergency exit, those things. You have to have that. And the samsara,
fourth is samsara is largely difficult to be challenged. This is samsara. These four are the
common sense, knowledge. It's not just Buddhist dhoma or religious dhoma. This is the way they
acknowledge it. Not acknowledge it. It is true. Life is a trip. Life is breakers. Everything is
impermanent. Cause and condition, effort is followed exactly as it. Samsara has challenged
any difficulties. This, when you have that understanding clearly, strongly, what it does
is called renunciations. It will soften our renunciation, something of our grasping cleanness.
It brings more common sense, knowledge in our heart and mind. So we will become more gentle,
not always craving, always greedy. It will make more precious. Oh, it's good. Feel more happy.
We will begin to settle down on the ground on our feet. We will not hover in the sky.
We will not carry it by the emotions. There it is called renunciations or train of mind. It will
make that knowledge. So now once you have that, that those people who have this understanding,
those have the devotions and the renunciation, those who are practicing dharma, we can also
like to leave this samsara. I don't like to even take rebirth in the samsara. I like to leave
complete samsara. Kind of having that attitude in practice, those are known as medium individuals
or mediocre individuals. And we highlight who are they? According to what I was taking on Mahayana
point with, those are great ahasas. Of course, they are kind of great masters, they are great
practices. It's not something that, but however, their kind of attitude or vision or goal is just
like to leave this samsara. Samsara, they don't like to return to the samsara. And therefore,
they call Mahayana, but in Nirvana, completely go beyond all the difficult troubles and then reach
the Nirvana states. Those individuals are named here as mediocre practices. And now we go to the
third, the big practitioner or big individuals. Big individual is their mark. That was what they
have. They have same thing. They have the devotion, they have the renunciation, understanding. Now,
they have the bodhicha. Bodhicha, that think of all the sentient beings.
And very, very sentient beings, I will be back to here in samsara as long as samsara is existing.
That long, I will turn rebirth. As the great Master Chantideva said in his teaching,
as long as space existing, as long as sentient beings existing, that long may I come back and
help you to all these beings free from the suffering, the difficulties. Such gracious, open, widely
proclamation of the prayers without any fears, without any thought. And that, that open heart
as spaces. Big as a space, deep as a spaces, deep as the ocean. That long, that offering,
his or her Dalai Lama, also a giant that prayers, open, really giant that prayers, as long as sams
ara
exist. And that long may I exist in the benefit for all these beings. And that is called big
individuals. Big individuals. This is now, when you think of the sentient beings, what we heard.
We heard always Madisonian beings. Everyone see as mothers. Why they call this, this,
this? First again, I will go to list these names. This is the, one of again highlighted teachings
of
the Atisha and as well as the Buddha's teaching. So I will list these numbers and then we go a
little
over there. First recognizing mothers. Recognize mothers. Second is remembering kindness
of the mothers. And the third is like to gratitude, like to repay back, back.
And the third port is loving kindness, loving kindness with beautiful appreciations,
beautiful appreciations. And the fifth is, is affection with compassion, strong affection
with compassion or sincerely affection with compassion. And sixth is, is, is, is good heart.
Or if I translate it also, I saw the word kolbeli. C-O-R-D-A-D-I-A-L-I-T-Y.
What? What's that? What? Chordiality. Chordiality. Chordiality. Chordiality. Chordiality. What's
that?
Chordial being kindness. Chordial being kindness. Chordial. Chordial. Chordial. Chordial. Chordial.
So again, if I simple translate it, good heart. It's better. Very good heart. Good heart.
And then, seven is bodhicap. Seven is bodhicap. So this is how we're going to strengthen our
bodhicap and how we're going to spreading our love and kindness compared to all the sentient beings
without any exceptions, without any discriminations. That is the one who's known as, if we do this,
that individual is known as what? Of course, we all know it's called bodhisattvas.
Courageous ones for the enlightenment. Courageous for the enlightenment to every living being's
enlightenment and courageous to them to get enlightenment so they can do the better service
to help to all the living beings. So this is what is, this now seven, I listed as seven,
seven, and we go over this now a little bit each, each of those points.
First is the motherhood. Recognize the motherhood. According to Buddhism, everyone is being as our
motherhoods. According to Buddhist teaching, we're not just the first time we came on this earth.
This is the one of the time or a time in this earth. We're born in this earth or this samsara,
born in the big and less times. Number of times we talk the birth and the samsara cannot come,
cannot put in the numbers. Therefore, in Buddhism, in the Buddha's teaching, it's countless times,
countless times we talk the birth. When we talk the birth, there is a poor means to come
to take the birth according to the Buddha's teaching that we all know. And those are again
our listed. The egg birth, monster birth, warm birth, and instant births. And among that,
monster and instant birth may be different. Instant birth is definitely, definitely not
dependent with the parents. But egg birth and as well as warm birth are dependent with birth,
truly, with parents. And that means we have to have mother, we have to have father. The parents
are being instrumental to take birth, our son. Among that, in the Buddha's teaching,
mention always mothers. Because even father is once upon a time, that can also be our mothers too.
So therefore, everyone is our mother, let's say. Everyone. And mothers, there are also
a number of mothers. What the great master Nagarjuna said in the letter to his friends.
And we piled up this whole earth, meant what's called clay, clay, and to put the,
make the bills, bills, the clay, all are completely made as clay. Clay, and that clay we're trying
to
make bill, bill as the size of the universe seat, seat and foot, the how many mothers we had.
Great Master Nagarjuna said, art is not enough to put that size of bill to count the mothers.
We have so many time. There's more than that. Therefore, we tell the birth countless times,
therefore, mothers, numbers of the mothers are common. And also in the teaching, you said,
how many times we drink the milk of the mothers is more than this whole oceans. And throughout
the time, if we put that whole milk in one side, and the ocean is one side, whole ocean,
the how about we drink the mother, milk from mother is more than the oceans. That many we talk.
So all this is the mother sent in business. Therefore, and then prison the mother.
For example, prison our life's mother. I know mother can't really see, mother is very kindness,
mother is very, very important in our lives. And kindness, those are a little bit kind of
sometimes not exactly very suitable statement in modern times. But however, we follow the teaching
of the Buddha, Buddha and according Buddhism, mother is kindness, mother is very special,
and mother so therefore recognize all the mothers, everyone as mother, and that and throw with our
dispersion models. So that is the first recognize all mothers. Second is, is remembering the
kindness
of the mothers. Mother did so many kindness things to us, so many things, but again, highlight
those
two kindness in the Buddha's end, what it called. First kindness is mother gave of this our birth.
The mother give kindness of the birth, kindness of this body, this physical, this is kindness,
that mother give. Second kindness is mother's, is mother continue support, give us in a way
life. Mother extended our lives. So that's the second kindness. Third kindness of the mother is
mother provided all the necessary things when we need it, when we are helpless. So she provided,
or the parent provided all our necessary things. The fourth kindness is she showed us or parent
showed us the wall. They become the first teacher. She showed us wall. Those are known as false
principle kindness of the parents or mothers. Fourth is the mother give us this birth. This
life is, of course, according to the Buddha's teaching, we continue that our consciousness
continually migrates in the travel of that. But to calm this, to bear at this physical condition
that what we have is provided by the mother and the parents. With all the parents,
parent in a dharma point of view, we won't have this et in luxuries of the breakers bodies.
They are instrumental to give according dharma point of view this eating in domains.
That's what we talk. The breakers human body is so breakthrough, so important, so necessary. Is it
a vehicle to cross the organ of samsara, to discover our innate nature of the zogti teachings.
All that is supposed to be prepared and give by the parents, mother. So mother is
so kind and so spacious. So first provided that. And the second is she give us lives or the parents
give us lives. Once we not make it in the womb, mother's womb, but when she comes out of the
mother's womb, what we are, we just almost come in one solid, small, small suspicious.
But don't know anything. Don't know the past. Don't know the future. Don't know even any
present except the crime. At that time mother neglected us. We have gone probably long term
and completely gone. But continually supported, parent supported. Hold hands with with the 10
fingers, holding that our ourself, close to heart, with love, with affection, with joy,
with the appreciations and keep and every necessary things provided.
And so we have here the parent didn't do. We long time we gone.
When there's no more me, no more you, it's gone. The devil is called the kindness of the providing
the life, this living, this breathing. Our breathing is gone a long time. They didn't support and
help. We are completely happiness. And so that is the second kindness. And the third is all provide
all the necessities, everything parent provided to us when we young young and even the best
capabilities.
Best capabilities, everything from the what's called from the diaper, from the dipole and that
rubble, rubble is put in. Yeah, what do you call that? All the everything, everything you think you
know better than what you have. All these lectures, all these things, they're completely provided
everything. Not just only that as from there, then they provide everything what they can do.
According their best capabilities, capabilities and even thinking of the always love and affections
and come back. I like to make the best of my district child. I like to do everything. I like
to do that and provided that from the kindest store or daycare school to the kindergarten
school and high school, everything bought out as like human beings, decent guys and girls that
because of the parents. That's the code code then the kindness of the providing of the all
the necessary things to become. And then port is giving them showing the world
parents told us mother taught do that don't do that and it's not good isn't that they become the
first our teacher helping the supporter so that we can stand strong and firm in a good
in challenge of the samsaras and trying to really protect and help and support everybody.
And that's the one called providing old, old like teachings, teachings and showing the world
exactly that. So those are highlighted this and now this mother sent the beings, beings all this
this is not just a mother this time but they did all the every parents in throughout the life
throughout the generation of times according to the sitting they did same thing as this parent did
and they did that even maybe some better that and this is not just only human beings look to the
animal how much they look protect every their best capabilities protecting their children
they they're children and when you ask those like what's called this penguin penguin penguins
you looked at how much really I mean so amazing how much they do this they give their birth and
then mother uh father comes back and then stand on that egg in the blood stream up the core
standing
there I heard it I mean said in this this is even one second or two seconds went out that egg went
out is frozen that's how it's holding I'm that sure how much the animal world I'm not just only
humans everyone protecting health and the support to growth of them that if this didn't mean that
they don't have have any feelings they don't have any any desires they're completely giving up
their
everything to protect this is what called motherless sentence beings all this not just at this time
in the past the past and now what this mother sentence is according to the teaching all this
everyone is struggling everyone is struggling even even they want to do is wish they do something
good but maybe through the unknowingly they are spoiling those things so they are these mother
sentence beings they're so kind and so spiritual so important me but yet they are in you know also
insolent by completely troubled difficult therefore I'd like to really help and support
to remove their suffering the difficulty troubles and to get bring them to enlightenment or to
discover they enter the natural that with that courage with that commitment commitment man and
then develop the loving kindness be great appreciations and then compassion that I won't
talk to but computations and then then good hearts good heart is the combination of the
combination of the loving kindness and compassion combined together in one central state as a good
heart with great thought attitude they like to benefit to all the living beings and big did that
for they will love their body they will love them both each other and then the body cata as
again with poor boneless boneless love boneless compassion boneless joy and boneless
equanimities they will love that and then practice it both each others when that kind of love that
body cata relevant from body cata and then inseparable body then after all the body cata as jokin
meditate
so those are very important because it's when you practice jokin we have to be very soft tender
heart
we feel love in a comparison and also we should be very peaceful calm and very what's called very
humble and it's symbols that is a sign of the practices symbol of the practice so with those
understanding and now we go to the heart of the zodiac teachings